What is the difference between astronomy and astrology?::Believe it or not, this is the most asked question that astronomers encounter. Many people do not understand the difference. In ancient times, they were considered one and the same. But the two disciplines were separated during the Age of Reason in the 17th century. Astrology is a practice of using the locations of the planets to look into a person's personality or predict the future. It is not a science and is considered a form of divination. By contrast, astronomy is the scientific study of the universe. Astronomers observe the objects in the night sky to try to determine their composition and learn more about the origin and structure of the universe.
Do I need an expensive telescope to enjoy astronomy?::Many people hesitate to get involved with astronomy because they believe it requires expensive equipment. The only thing you really need to enjoy the night sky is your eyes, a dark viewing location, and some patience. To get a better look at things, a pair of binoculars can provide a really good view. Many people will be surprised how many more stars and objects they can see with a decent pair of 10X binoculars. They collect much more light than the human eye and will bring much dimmer objects into view. You can even see Jupiter’s moons with binoculars. A simple camera tripod to steady the binoculars is also a good idea, since your arms can get tired very quickly.
How does a telescope work?::The primary purposes of a telescope are to gather light and magnify an image. The aperture (opening) of a telescope is larger than that of the human eye and therefore, can gather much more light. This enables us to see dim objects that are too faint to see with the naked eye. The larger the aperture of the telescope, the more light it can gather. Telescopes also use a series of lenses and/or mirrors to magnify the image, enabling us to see more detail.
Why can't I see very many stars at night?::If you live near a big city, you may not be able to see a lot of stars. The reason for this is light pollution. Dust and water vapor in the atmosphere reflects the bright city lights back down towards the ground. This “light pollution” tends to be brighter than some of the dim stars and other deep sky objects, essentially hiding them from view. To truly appreciate the night sky, you must get as far away from city lights as possible. There is no more beautiful sight then the band of the Milky Way stretching across a dark sky. We can all help to combat light pollution by convincing our local authorities to use more efficient light fixtures that shine the light on the ground and block it from going up into the sky.
Where does space begin?::Space is defined as the area above the Earth’s atmosphere. But there is no specific boundary since the atmosphere gradually thins out as you move farther away from the Earth. However, NASA awards astronaut status to anyone who flies above 50 miles (80 km).
Why is the sky blue?::This is another question that gets asked a lot. The blue color of the sky during the day is caused by scattered sunlight. The white light from the Sun is composed of all the colors of the rainbow. During the day, the molecules in the air scatter the blue light from the Sun more that the red light making the sky appear blue. In the evening, however, we see the red and orange colors because the blue light has been scattered away from our line of sight.
Why is the sky dark at night?::Believe it or not, there is no easy answer to this question. Scientists have observed that if the universe was infinitely large, and contained an infinite number of stars, then the night sky should actually be as bright and as hot as the surface of the Sun. But this obviously is not the case. This little brain teaser has come to be known as Olber’s paradox, named after the German astronomer who tried to solve the problem in 1823. The most likely explanation is that the universe is simply not old enough and the observable part of the universe contains too few stars to fill the sky with light. Thus, the night sky is dark.
What is the speed of light?::Light travels at a constant speed of 186,262 miles per second (299,792,458 meters per second). Since the speed of light is constant, it can also be used to measure vast distances. Distances between objects in space are measured in light years. One light year is equal to the distance light travels in a year, which is just under 6 trillion miles (10 trillion kilometers). The speed of light is considered to be the ultimate speed limit in the universe. Scientists believe that it is impossible to travel faster than light because any object traveling at the speed of light would have to achieve infinite mass.
Did Galileo invent the telescope?::Many people believe that Galileo invented the telescope, but they are wrong. It was actually a man named Hans Lippershe from Holland who assembled the first telescope. Several years later, Galileo became the first person to use a telescope for astronomical observation. With his early telescope, Galileo observed the craters on the moon, the rings of Saturn, and the moons of Jupiter.
How old is the Earth?::All though the exact age of the Earth is difficult to determine, scientists believe it to be about 4.54 billion years old. This age has been estimated by measuring the amount of radioactive decay in rocks and minerals on Earth, and by observing the elements that exist in the Sun. The age of the Earth is believed to be the same as the age of the Sun and the other planets in the Solar System since they all formed at the same time from the same raw materials.
How big is the Earth?::The mean diameter of the Earth is 7,918 miles (12,742 kilometers). Believe it or not, the Earth is not a perfect sphere. The rotation of the planet causes it to bulge slightly at the equator. The diameter at the equator is 7,926 miles (12,756 kilometers), while the diameter at the poles is only 7,900 miles (12,720 kilometers). Likewise, the circumference of the Earth at the equator is 24,902 miles (40,075 kilometers) while the circumference at the poles is only 24,860 miles (40,008 kilometers). Because the Earth is flatter at the poles and wider at the equator it is actually considered to be an oblate spheroid instead of a perfect sphere. However, if the planet were to stop spinning on its axis, gravity would pull it into a nearly perfect sphere.
What is the Earth made of?::The Earth is actually layered much like the layers of an onion. The outer layer is called the crust. The crust is composed mainly of iron, oxygen, silicon, magnesium, sulfur, and nickel with trace amounts of other elements. The next layer down is the mantle, composed mainly of magnesium and iron. The inner-most layer is called the core, which is composed of two parts. The outer core is believed to be a liquid iron and nickel alloy while the inner core is a solid mass of iron. The inner core is thought to spin within the liquid outer core, creating a magnetic field that protects the Earth from solar radiation.
How much does the Earth weigh?::The Earth is actually weightless because it exists in space. But it does have mass. If we were able to weigh the Earth in its own gravitational field, it would weigh approximately 13.2 septillion pounds. That is 13,200,000,000,000,000,000,000,000 pounds (6,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000 kilograms). This number assumes we are weighing the planet in Earth's gravitational field. It would weigh more or less on other planets, depending on their mass. But wait, there more. The Earth is actually gaining mass. It is believed that our planet is gaining about 40,000 metric tons of mass each year from space debris that impacts the surface and burns up in the atmosphere.
Why How fast does the Earth rotate?::The Earth rotates once on its axis each day. Because it is so large, it is moving incredibly fast. Its speed, however, depends on the location you are measuring. At the equator, the speed is 1,038 miles per hour (1,670 kilometers per hour). The speed decreases as you travel further north or south. The middle latitudes of the United States and Europe are moving at between 700 and 900 miles per hour (1,125 to 1,450 kph). At the the poles, it is hardly moving at all. At the south pole, you would take an entire day just to rotate once in place.
How fast does the Earth move around the Sun?::The Earth takes one year (365 days) to orbit the Sun. Since it is 93 million miles away from the Sun, it has to be moving extremely fast to cover this vast distance. As it orbits the Sun, the Earth moves at an average of about 67,000 miles per hour (107,300 kilometers per hour). This is only an average because the Earth's orbit around the Sun is not perfectly circular. It is actually slightly elliptical. When the Earth is closer to the Sun, it moves a little bit faster. When it is further away, it moves a little slower.
What is the terminator?::As the Sun shines on the surface of the Earth, it illuminates one half of the Earth's surface. The other half is in darkness, or night. The dividing line between day and night is known as the terminator. The terminator line passes through any given point on Earth two times a day, once during sunrise and again during sunset. Because of the tilt of the Earth's axis, the polar regions are an exception. They spend parts of the year in perpetual day and night. The terminator is not a sharp line on Earth. It is actually kind of blurry because the atmosphere scatters the sunlight. This is why we have dawn and dusk before sunrise and sunset.
How fast does the terminator move?::The terminator line moves across the surface of the Earth as the Earth rotates on its axis. Therefore, the speed that the terminator moves is the same as the speed that the Earth rotates. At the equator, the speed would be 1,038 miles per hour (1,670 kilometers per hour). The speed decreases as you travel further north or south.
How thick is the Earth's atmosphere?::The Earth's atmosphere is an extremely thin sheet of gas that surrounds the planet. All though the planet is nearly 8,000 miles (12,875 kilometers) in diameter, the atmosphere is only 62 miles (100 kilometers) thick. This thin sheet of gas is all that separates us from the cold vacuum of outer space. All though some gas molecules extend out as far as 300 miles (480 kilometers), the majority of the atmosphere's mass lies below 62 miles, which is generally considered to be the edge of space.
What is the Earth's atmosphere made of?::The Earth's atmosphere is made of a variety of different gasses. It is composed of 78% nitrogen, 21% oxygen, 0.9% argon, 0.4% carbon dioxide, and trace amounts of other gasses such as neon, helium, and methane. It also contains about 1% water vapor, which forms clouds and storms.
What is the Moon made of?::Science is still learning about the composition of the Moon. We know a lot about its surface, but the inside is still a mystery. The outer layer of the Moon is known as the crust, and is composed mainly of silicon, oxygen, magnesium, iron, calcium, and aluminum. Below the crust is the mantle, which is believed to be made primarily of the minerals olivine, orthopyroxene and clinopyroxene. The Moon's mantle is thought to contain more iron than the mantle of Earth. At the center of the Moon is the core, which is believed to be composed of metallic iron with small amounts of nickel and sulfur.
How far is the Moon from Earth?::The distance between the Moon and the Earth averages 238,857 miles (384,403 kilometers). Since the Moon’s orbit is not a perfect circle, its distance varies. At its farthest point, known as apogee, it is 252,080 miles (405,686 km) away. At its closest point, known as perigee, it is 225,621 miles (363,104 km) away.
Is the Moon moving away from the Earth?::Yes, the Moon is gradually moving away from the Earth at the rate of about 1.5 inches (3.8 centimeters) per year. We know this because we can track the Moon’s distance using lasers. The Apollo moon missions left reflective mirrors on the Moon’s surface. By measuring the time it takes a laser beam to travel to the Moon and back, we can calculate the distance using the speed of light. When the Moon first formed, it was much closer to the Earth. Astronomers believe it was about 12 times closer than it is now, which means it would have been much larger in the night sky.
How was the Moon formed?::Astronomers believe that the Moon was formed billions of years ago when a small planet the size of Mars collided with the Earth. The foreign planet hit with a glancing blow and ejected a large part of the Earth’s molten mantle into space. Over time, this material coalesced and cooled to form the Moon.
Why does the Moon shine?::The Moon shines because the light from the Sun shines and reflects from the Moon’s surface. What we think of as Moon shine is actually just reflected sunlight.
Why is the Moon larger when it is close to the horizon?::Although the Moon looks much larger when it is low in the sky near the horizon, this is actually just an optical illusion. It is actually the same size as when it is directly over head. This illusion has been known since ancient times and also happens with the Sun and the constellations. This same illusion works on mountains and tall buildings as well. They appear larger at long distances than they do at closer distances. The reasons for this are complex, but they have something to do with how our brains interpret the sizes of large objects on the horizon. If you don't believe this is only an illusion, you can compare the size of the Moon near the horizon to the size directly over head by holding your finger out at arm's length and comparing the sizes of the Moon with your finger.
What causes the phases of the Moon?::The Moon goes through phases because it is traveling around the Earth. One half of the Moon is always illuminated by the Sun. As the Moon circles the Earth, different amounts of the illuminated part of the Moon are facing us. These phases range from Full Moon (when the Moon is on the opposite side of the Earth then the Sun) to a New Moon (when the Moon is between the Sun and the Earth. It takes about 29 and a half days for a complete cycle, which equals one complete orbit of the Moon around the Earth.
Can you see the flag on the Moon with a telescope?::This is a question that astronomers get asked a lot. Unfortunately, the equipment left behind by the Apollo missions is tiny in comparison to the size of the Moon. Ground-based telescopes, especially those owned by amateur observers, are not capable of resolving objects this small at such extreme distances. Extremely large telescopes could theoretically catch a bright spot of sunlight reflecting from some of the moon landing equipment, although they would not be able to observe the equipment directly.
What is a blue moon?::The answer to this question is a bit complicated. The most recent and most popular definition says that a blue moon is the second of two full moons occurring in the same month. Since the lunar cycle is 29 days and most months have 30-31 days, we eventually find a situation where a full moon occurs at the beginning and the ending of the same month. There is also a second, older definition of a blue moon. This one defines a blue moon as the third full moon in a season with four full moons. Normally there is one full moon each month, so a season such as summer would usually have three full moons. The reason for this is complex, and has to do with the ancient Christian ecclesiastical calendar. This calendar was used to determine important dates such as Easter. Each of the usual 12 full moons of the year had a name associated with the time of year in which they usually occurred. In a year with 13 full moons, the extra full moon was referred to as a blue moon so the calendar could stay on track.
How far away is the Sun?::The average distance from the Sun to the Earth is 93 million miles (149 million kilometers). Because the Earth’s orbit around the Sun is not a perfect circle, it varies. At its closest point to the Sun, known as perihelion, the distance is 91 million miles (146 million km). At is farthest point, known as aphelion, the distance is 94.5 million miles (152 million km).
How big is the Sun?::The Sun is an average-sized star that is 865,000 miles (1,392,000 kilometers) in diameter. It is so large that you could fit the planet Earth inside it well over a million times. The Sun actually makes up about 99% of the entire mass of the Solar System. The remaining objects, including all of the planets, moons, comets, and asteroids compose the other 1% of the Solar System.
How hot is the Sun?::The core of the Sun is extremely hot at about 27 million degrees Fahrenheit (15 million degrees Celsius). The surface of the Sun is much cooler than the core, at about 9,900 degrees F (5,500 degrees C). For some strange reason, not yet completely understood by scientists, the Sun’s outer atmosphere is hotter than its surface. Known as the corona, its temperature reaches 5 million degrees F (2.7 million degrees C).
How long does it take the light from the Sun to reach Earth?::The light from the Sun travels at the speed of light, 186,282 miles per second. Since the Sun is about 93 million miles from Earth, it takes the light about 8.4 minutes to reach us. This means that when you look up at the Sun, you are actually seeing it the way it looked 8.4 minutes ago. To give you an idea just how close we are to the Sun, the light from the next nearest star, Proxima Centauri, takes 4.3 years to reach the Earth.
What are sunspots and why do they appear dark?::Sunspots are temporary areas on the surface of the Sun that are cooler than the surrounding areas. They are caused by intense magnetic activity that inhibits convection and reduces the surface temperature. Sunspots appear dark on images of the Sun taken with filters because the filter significantly reduces the brightness of the Sun overall. If you could observe a sunspot by itself, away from the rest of the Sun, it would actually be blindingly bright.
What is the solar wind?::The solar wind is a stream of charged particles that are ejected from the Sun in all directions at a very high rate of speed. This constant stream of particles can interact with planets by slowly blowing away their atmospheres. The Earth has a strong magnetic field that deflects the solar wind around the planet and protects our atmosphere. Sometimes the particles from the solar wind can interact with gases in the upper atmosphere of the Earth, causing them to glow. This phenomenon is known as the aurora borealis (northern lights) in the northern hemisphere and the aurora australis in the southern hemisphere.
How many planets are there in the Solar System?::This used to be an easy question. Many of us grew up learning about the nine planets, starting with Mercury and ending with Pluto. But recent discoveries of other Pluto-type objects in the outer Solar System began to call Pluto’s planet status into question. Finally, in 2006, the International Astronomical Union (IAU) decided to change the official definition of a planet. Pluto was reclassifies as a dwarf planet, leaving the total number of planets in our Solar System at eight.
What is the largest planet in the Solar System?::Of the eight planets in our Solar System, the largest is Jupiter. This giant planet is over a thousand times larger than the Earth, and is composed mostly of hydrogen gas. The famous giant red spot on Jupiter is a giant storm system that has been raging for several hundred years and is actually twice the size of the Earth.
What is the smallest planet in the Solar System?::The smallest planet in the Solar System used to be Pluto, with a diameter of 1,441 miles (2,320 kilometers). But in 2006, Pluto was demoted and reclassified as a dwarf planet in. Now Mercury is the smallest planet in the Solar System with a diameter of 3,032 miles. ( 4,879 kilometers).
How old is the Solar System?::Astronomers believe that the Solar System is about 4.6 billion years old. They have determined this age in part by studying meteorites. It is believed that meteors formed at the same time as the rest of the Solar System from a could of dust and gas. When meteors fall to earth as meteorites, a technique called radioactive dating can be used to calculate how old they are. Astronomers also believe the Sun is about middle aged, which means it should continue to shine for about another 5 billion years.
What exactly is a meteor shower?::A meteor shower is an event where a large number of meteors appear to radiate from a common point in the night sky. The meteors are cause by streams of debris left over by comets. This debris is usually no larger than a grain of sand. As the debris enters the Earth’s atmosphere at a high rate of speed, the friction causes the gases to glow. This glowing trail of ionized gas is known as an ionization trail. Meteor showers occur at the same time every year as the Earth passes through the debris field. Meteor showers can be stronger if the comet has recently passed by leaving a fresh stream of debris.
What are asteroids and where do they come from?::An asteroid is a small, rocky or metallic body found in orbit around the Sun. Most of the asteroids in our Solar System are located between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter in an area known as the asteroid belt. They are thought to be the left over remains of a planet that was either destroyed or never fully formed. Asteroids can range in size from a few feet to several miles in diameter. Occasionally, gravity can cause an asteroid to change its orbit and send it on a path towards the inner Solar System. If the asteroid crosses the orbit of Earth, it is known as a near-Earth asteroid, or NEA. NEAs have a small chance of eventually colliding with the Earth. Meteor crater in Arizona is an impact crater nearly a mile across that was caused by an asteroid about the size of a city bus. It is believed that an asteroid about 5 miles in diameter may have been responsible for the extinction of the dinosaurs.
What are comets and where do they come from?::Comets are relatively small Solar System bodies composed of ice and dust. Due to this unusual composition, many astronomers refer to them as “dirty snowballs”. It is believed that most comets originate in an area at the outer edge of the Solar System known as the Oort cloud. Occasionally, gravity will disturb a comet’s orbit and send it on a new course toward the inner Solar System. Comets with highly elliptical orbits like this are known as periodic comets, and they return to the inner Solar System at a regular period. The most famous periodic comet is comet Halley, with a period of 76 tears.
Why do comets have tails?::Comets are probably best known for their long, luminous tails. These tails are actually plumes of dust and gas that are ejected from the comet as it nears the Sun. Comets are composed of frozen ice and dust. If a comet’s orbit takes it close to the Sun, the solar radiation will cause the volatile materials in the comet to vaporize, carrying some of the dust along with them. As the Sun shines on this vaporized material, known as the coma, it begins to glow. The solar wind pushes the material out away from the comet. Because of this, a comet’s tail always points away from the Sun. Comets will usually have two tails, one formed from ionized gas, and the other formed from dust reflecting the sunlight.
What is a star?::A star is a gigantic, luminous ball of heated gas, or plasma, held together by gravity. They are formed mainly of hydrogen and helium. Stars burn helium in a process called nuclear fusion, where helium atoms are fused together under enormous pressure and temperature to form helium. This process gives off an incredible amount of energy. Stars are very large. The Sun, which is the closest star to the Earth, is so large that you could fit a million Earths inside it.
How far away is the closest star?::This is actually a trick question. The closest star to the Earth would be the Sun, at a distance of about 93 million miles (149 million kilometers). The closest star outside our solar system would be Proxima Centauri. It is located about 4 light years from Earth. That is over 23 trillion miles (38 trillion kilometers).
Why do stars seem to twinkle?::The twinkling of stars is caused by instability of our atmosphere. As the starlight passes through the atmosphere, the movement of the air bends the light slightly and makes the stars twinkle. If you could view the stars from outside the atmosphere, like the space station or the Moon, they would not twinkle.
How many stars are visible in the night sky?::The number of stars visible in the night sky depends on many factors, such as the clarity of the atmosphere, the time of the year, and the amount of light pollution. But on a good night, far away from city lights, you should be able to see about 2,000 stars with the naked eye. Astronomers have calculated that about 6,000 stars should be seen from the darkest locations.
How many stars are there in the universe?::The universe is unbelievably huge. There are billions of galaxies and each galaxy contains billions of stars. The latest estimates from astronomers say that there are a staggering 300 sextillion stars in the known universe. That is a 3 followed by 23 zeros, or 3 trillion times 100 billion. That represents several stars for every grain of sand on Earth.
What is the brightest star in the sky?::The brightest star visible in the night sky is Sirius, located in the constellation Canis Major. With an apparent magnitude of -1.46, it is nearly twice as bright as Canopus, the second brightest star. Apparent magnitude is a measure of a star’s brightness as seen from Earth. The lower the number, the brighter the star. Some of the planets appear like stars and can be brighter than Sirius when they are close to the Earth. Jupiter can have an apparent magnitude of -2.6 when it is close.
How long do stars live?::The life cycles of stars differ greatly and depend mostly on the star’s size. Large stars burn their fuel faster while smaller stars burn it more slowly. The largest stars burn their fuel so fast that they only last for a few million years. Average sized stars like the Sun live for about 10 billion years. Smaller stars, such as red dwarfs, burn their fuel so slowly that they can live for trillions of years. Our Sun is believed to be about 4.5 billion years old. It should shine for about another 5 billion years.
How do stars die?::Just as the lives of stars depends on their size, so does their death. Stars exist in a state of equilibrium because the gravity pulling in on them equals the pressure pushing out. When a star begins to run out of fuel, the outward pressure decreases, and gravity wins. The effect of gravity on the star depends on its size. Smaller stars will eventually lose their outer layers and shrink their cores to form white dwarfs. Larger, more massive stars will experience much more violent deaths. Gravity crushes these stars so fast that a shock wave is created, resulting in a massive explosion known as a supernova. What remains behind depends on the mass of the star. Large stars will form extremely dense objects known as neutron stars. The largest and most massive stars will experience such a tremendous crush of gravity that they will literally be crushed out of existence into what are known as black holes.
What exactly are constellations?::Constellations are arbitrary groupings of stars that seen to form pictures. Ages ago, ancient people looked up at the night sky and thought they could see patterns. Since different constellations are visible at different times of the year, people used these patterns to tell what time of the year it was. Today, we use the constellations to map the night sky and help classify the locations of objects.
How many constellations are there in the night sky?::Throughout the ages, different cultures saw different patterns and images in the stars. Thus, the constellations have changed over time. Today, we divide the sky into 88 different constellations. Astronomers use them to classify objects in the sky. Every star or other object in the night sky falls into one of these 88 constellations.
Are all of the stars in a constellation the same distance from us?::No. Most of the stars in a constellation have no connection with one another. They are simply chance alignments of the stars. The stars are all different distances from us, but because they are so far they all appear flat as seen from Earth. If you could travel far out into space, the constellations would look completely different from your point of view.
Are the constellations permanent?::All of the stars in the sky are moving in relation to the Earth. Since they are so far away, it takes thousands of years to notice their movement. But eventually the movement of the stars will make today’s constellations completely unrecognizable.
How old is the universe?::This is a question that has puzzled astronomers for many years. The most recent estimates put the age of the universe at between 13 and 20 billion years. However, as new discoveries are made with the Hubble space telescope and other new technologies, these numbers may continue to be revised.
How big is the universe?::The latest estimates say it is about 156 billion light years across. Since one light year equals about 6 trillion miles, that is a very big number. But since we can only see so far, we may never know exactly how big the universe is. Some astronomers even believe the universe is infinite in size. And there may be even other universes out there beyond ours.
How did the universe begin?::The most widely accepted scientific theory today suggests that the universe began about 14 billion years ago from an infinitely small, dense, and hot state that expanded rapidly. As it continued to expand and cool, hydrogen gas formed into stars and eventually formed into galaxies. This theory is known as the big bang theory and helps to explain why the universe appears to be expanding today. Astronomers have observed that galaxies are moving away from each other. The farther away a galaxy is, the faster it is moving away. The big bang theory states that it is actually the fabric of space that is expanding. Matter is simply going along for the ride like dust on the surface of a balloon. As the balloon expands, the dust gets farther and farther apart.
How will the universe end?::Scientists used to think that the combined gravity from all of the matter in the universe would eventually slow its expansion and cause it to contract back into an infinitely small, dense state as it existed before the big bang. But now, most agree that there is not enough matter in the universe to slow its expansion. This means that it will continue to expand until all of the stars eventually burn out. Eventually, matter will decompose and all that will be left is a cold, dark void. That may sound depressing, but it will take at least 100 trillion years.
How many galaxies are there in the universe?::This is a question that continually puzzles astronomers and is subject to frequent revision. The reason for this is because we can only see so far with the instruments we have available to us today. The most recent estimates by astronomers suggest that there are about 200 billion galaxies in the known universe. However, as new telescopes and new technologies emerge, this number is almost sure to be increased as we gain a better understanding into the true size of the universe.
Why do some stars end up as black holes?::The answer involves the gravity and the internal pressure within the star. These two things oppose each other -- the gravitational force of the star acting on a chunk of matter at the star's surface will want to cause that matter to fall inward, but the internal pressure of the star, acting outward at the surface, will want to cause the matter to fly outward. When these two are balanced (i.e., equal in strength) the star will maintain its size: neither collapse not expand. Such is the case for the Sun at the moment, and even, for that matter, for the Earth. However, when a star runs out of nuclear fuel, and therefore continues to lose energy from the surface (it is emitting light energy), while not replacing the lost energy through nuclear fusion (no more nuclear fuel), gravity will win out over internal pressure and the star will contract slowly or collapse quickly depending upon the details of the internal structure and composition. Gravity wins out over the internal pressure of the star, because that pressure was produced by a normal, hot gas, and that gas is losing energy as the star radiates energy from the surface.  The star may thus end up as a black hole. It just depends upon whether or not the collapse is stopped at some smaller size once another source of pressure (other than what is produced by a normal, hot gas) can become sufficiently strong to balance the inward gravitational force. There are other forms of pressure besides that produced by a hot gas. Pressing your hand upon a desk top will let you experience one of these other pressures --- the desk pushes up against you, indeed it can support your weight (gravitational force)! The pressure that keeps the desk rigid against your weight is caused by forces between the atoms in the desk.  Furthermore, electrons within atoms must avoid each other (for example, they cannot all be in the same atomic "orbit" --- this is called "the exclusion principle"). Therefore, if we had a collection of freely moving electrons they would also avoid each other: the harder you compress the collection (the smaller the volume they are confined in) the more they rebel against the squeeze --- a pressure opposes your confinement of the electrons.  This "electron avoidance" pressure can only become strong enough to oppose the gravitational forces within a star of about the mass of the Sun when the star is compressed by gravity to about the diameter of the Earth. Thus a star as massive as the Sun can be prevented from becoming a black hole when it collapses to the size of the Earth, and the internal "electron avoidance" pressure (called the "degenerate electron pressure") becomes strong enough to hold the star up. This sort of pressure does not depend upon the energy content of the star ---- even if the star continues to lose energy from its surface, the pressure will continue to hold the star up. Our Sun can never become a black hole.  However, if the star is more massive than something like 3 to 5 solar masses, its gravitational forces will be larger, and its internal degenerate electron pressure will never be sufficient to stop its collapse. It turns out that neutrons can also obey the exclusion principle and neutrons will be produced in abundance when a massive star collpses, but even neutron degeneracy cannot stop the collapse of massive stars --- anything over 3 to 5 solar masses cannot be stopped, it will become a black hole according to current thinking. 
How is time changed in a black hole?::Well, in a certain sense it is not changed at all. If you were to enter a black hole, you would find you watch ticking along at the same rate as it always had (assuming both you and the watch survived the passage into the black hole). However, you would quickly fall toward the center where you would be killed by enormous tidal forces (e.g., the force of gravity at you feet, if you fell feet first, would be much larger than at you head, and you would be stretched apart).  Although your watch as seen by you would not change its ticking rate, just as in special relativity (if you know anything about that), someone else would see a different ticking rate on your watch than the usual, and you would see their watch to be ticking at a different than normal rate. For example, if you were to station yourself just outside a black hole, while you would find your own watch ticking at the normal rate, you would see the watch of a friend at great distance from the hole to be ticking at a much faster rate than yours. That friend would see his own watch ticking at a normal rate, but see your watch to be ticking at a much slower rate. Thus if you stayed just outside the black hole for a while, then went back to join your friend, you would find that the friend had aged more than you had during your separation. 
Does the E=mc^2 equation apply to a black hole?::E=mc^2 is always true. In the case of a black hole, for instance, there has been some speculation that black holes can, through a quantum mechanical trick, radiate energy, and in the process their mass would therefore decrease. If nothing travels at the speed of light, except light, how can a black hole also pull light into itself? If nothing travels at the speed of light, except light, how can a black hole also pull light into itself?  If nothing travels at the speed of light, except light, how can a black hole also pull light into itself? The path that a light ray follows can be bent by a gravitating body, even the Earth (although the bending in that case is very small). This effect has been measured for light from a star as it passed the Sun during a solar eclipse. This bending of the light rays increases as the strength of the gravitational field increases. A black hole is simply a region where the effect on light is so great that light cannot escape the region. What is the best evidence for the existence of black holes? Is it all really just a theory? 
What is the closest planet to the Sun?::Mercury
Where Does Space Begin?::The standard space-travel answer to that question puts the "edge of space" at 100 kilometers above Earth's surface. That boundary is also called the "von Kármán line", named after the Theodore von Kármán, the Hungarian scientist who figured it out.
How Did the Universe Begin?::The universe began some 13.7 billion years ago in an event called the Big Bang. It was not an explosion (as is often depicted in some artwork) but more of a sudden expansion from a tiny pinpoint of matter called a singularity. From that beginning, the universe has expanded and grown more complex.
What is the Universe Made of?::This is one of those questions that has an answer that is quite mind-expanding. Basically, the universe consists of galaxies and the objects they contain: stars, planets, nebulae, black holes and other dense objects. The early universe was largely hydrogen with some helium and lithium, and the first stars formed from that helium. As they evolved and died, they created heavier and heavier elements, which formed second- and third-generation stars and their planets.
Will the Universe Ever End?::The universe had a definite beginning, called the Big Bang. It's ending is more like the "long, slow expansion". The truth is, the universe is slowly dying as it expands and grows and gradually cools. It will take billions and billions of years to cool completely and stop its expansion. 
How Many Stars Can We See at Night?::That depends on many factors, including how dark the skies are where. In light-polluted areas, people see only the brightest stars and not the dimmer ones. Out in the countryside, the view is better. Theoretically, with the naked eye and good seeing conditions, an observer can see around 3,000 stars without using a telescope or binoculars. 
What Types of Stars Are Out There?::Astronomers classify stars and assign "types" to them. They do this according to their temperatures and colors, along with some other characteristics. Generally speaking, there are stars like the Sun, which live their lives for billions of years before swelling up and gently dying. Other, more massive stars are called "giants" and are usually red to orange in color. There are also white dwarfs. Our Sun is properly classified as a yellow dwarf. 
Why Do Some Stars Appear To Twinkle?::The children's nursery rhyme about "Twinkle, twinkle little star" actually poses a very sophisticated science question about what stars are. The short answer is: the stars themselves don't twinkle. Our planet's atmosphere causes starlight to waver as it passes through and that appears to us as twinkling. 
How Long Does a Star Live?::Compared to humans, stars live incredibly long lives. The shortest-lived ones can shine for tens of millions of years while the old-timers can last for many billions of years. The study of stars' lives and how they are born, live, and die is called "stellar evolution", and involves looking at many types of stars to understand their life cycles. 
What is the Moon Made of?::When the Apollo 11 astronauts landed on the Moon in 1969, they collected many rock and dust samples for study. Planetary scientists already knew the Moon is made of rock, but the analysis of that rock told them about the Moon's history, the composition of the minerals that make up its rocks, and the impacts that created its craters and plains. It's a largely basaltic world, which implies heavy volcanic activity in its past.
What are Moon Phases?::The Moon's shape appears to change throughout the month, and its shapes are called the phases of the Moon. They are a result of our orbit around the Sun combined with the Moon's orbit around Earth. 
What's in the Space Between Stars?::We often think of space as the absence of matter, but actual space is not really all that empty. The stars and planets are scattered throughout the galaxies, and between them is a vacuum filled with gas and dust. The gases between galaxies are often there due to a galaxy collision that rips gases away from each of the galaxies in involved. In addition, if conditions are right, supernova explosions can also drive hot gases out into intergalactic space.
What's it Like to Live and Work in Space?::Dozens and dozens of people have done it, and more will in the future! It turns out that, aside from the low gravity, higher radiation hazard, and other dangers of space, it's a lifestyle and a job. 
What Happens to a Human Body in a Vacuum?::Do the movies get it right? Well, not actually. Most of them depict messy, explosive endings, or other dramatic events. The truth is while being in space without a spacesuit WILL kill whoever is unlucky enough to be in that situation (unless the person gets rescued very, very quickly), their body probably won't explode. It's more likely to freeze and suffocate first. Still not a great way to go.  
What Happens When Black Holes Collide?::People are fascinated by black holes and their actions in the universe. Until very recently, it's been tough for scientists to measure what happens when black holes collide. Certainly, it's a very energetic event and would give off a lot of radiation. However, another cool thing happens: the collision creates gravitational waves and those can be measured! Those waves are also created when neutron stars collide!
How many constellations are there?::Astronomers officially recognize 88 constellations covering the entire sky in the northern and southern hemispheres. Currently, 14 men and women, 9 birds, two insects, 19 land animals, 10 water creatures, two centaurs, one head of hair, a serpent, a dragon, a flying horse, a river and 29 inanimate objects are represented in the night sky (the total comes to more than 88 because some constellations include more than one creature.) It is important to realize that the great majority of star patterns bear little, if any, resemblance to the figures they are supposed to represent and whose name they bear. The ancient constellation-makers probably meant for them to be symbolic, not literal, representations of their favorite animals or fabled heroes, a kind of celestial "Hall of Fame." 
Are there obsolete constellations?::Over the centuries, some astronomers have attempted to name constellations after themselves or to flatter a patron or king. This reached a peak during the heyday of celestial mapping in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. Few of these survived longer than the astronomers who named them, although they sometimes can be seen in antique star charts. For example, in 1678, Edmond Halley (of Halley's Comet fame) invented a constellation called Robur Carolinum, or Charles' Oak, in honor of King Charles II of England. This constellation did not last long, especially after its rejection by the French astronomer Lacaille in his maps of the southern sky. In 1754, the English naturalist and noted satirist John Hall invented thirteen constellations based on rather unappealing animals such as a toad, a leech, a spider, an earthworm, and a slug. Fortunately, even though they may have been intended as a joke, they never caught on. At its first meeting in 1922, the International Astronomical Union (IAU), astronomy's governing body which is responsible, among other things, for assigning names to celestial objects and features on those objects, officially adopted the list of 88 constellations that we use today. Definitive boundaries between constellations, which extend out beyond the star figures, were set in 1930, so that every star, nebula, or galaxy, no matter how faint, now lies within the limits of one constellation. For today's astronomer, constellations refer not so much to the patterns of stars, but to precisely defined areas of the sky. 
Where do individual star names come from?::The ancient Greek tradition was to name stars by their position within a constellation. For example, Ptolemy refers to one star by the description "the reddish one on the southern eye," a star we now know as Aldebaran in the constellation of Taurus the Bull. But these descriptions could get quite involved. Ptolemy refers to another star in the obsolete constellation of Argo the Boat as "the northernmost of two stars close together over the little shield in the poop," a bit cumbersome if you are trying to learn the names of many stars. When Al-Sufi, one of the greatest Arabic astronomers, published his own version of Ptolemy's Almagest in the tenth century, he introduced many individual star names. For centuries, bedouin Arabs had given names to bright stars -- for example Aldebaran and Betelgeuse -- since they regarded single stars as representing people and animals. Many of the original meanings of the names had been forgotten even in Al-Sufi's time, but some were direct translations of Ptolemy's descriptions. For example, the star name Fomalhaut (in the constellation of Pisces) comes from the Arabic for "mouth of the southern fish," which is how Ptolemy described it in the Almagest. After the tenth century, the works of Ptolemy and others were re-introduced into Europe by the Islamic Arabs, and the Greek books were translated from Arabic into Latin, the scientific language of the day. Thus we know Ptolemy's work from its Arabic translation, The Almagest, not by its original Greek title. And it explains why we have a system of Greek constellations with Latin names containing stars with Arabic names. 
Did other cultures also see constellations in the sky?::Nearly every culture on Earth has seen patterns in the stars. But, not surprisingly, very few have seen the same patterns. Take, for example, the Big Dipper, perhaps the most recognizable star pattern in the sky. The Big Dipper is not actually a constellation itself, but is part of a larger pattern known to the Greeks as Ursa Major, the Great Bear. The seven stars of the Big Dipper have inspired many stories, perhaps because they are bright and located so near the north celestial pole, around which the stars rotate during the course of the night. But not everyone calls it a Dipper. The British call it a Plough. In Southern France, it is a Saucepan. The Skidi Pawnee Indians saw a stretcher on which a sick man was carried. To the ancient Maya, it was a mythological parrot named Seven Macaw. Hindu sky lore called it the Seven Rishis, or Wise Men. To the early Egyptians, it was the thigh and leg of a bull. The ancient Chinese thought of it as a special chariot for the Emperor of the Heaven or some other celestial bureaucrat. For the Micmac Indians of Canada's Maritime Provinces, along with several other North American Indian tribes, the bowl of the Big Dipper was a bear, and the stars in the handle represented hunters tracking the bear. And in the nineteenth century, the Big Dipper became a symbol of freedom for runaway slaves, who "followed the Drinking Gourd" to the northern states. 
Are all the stars in a constellation the same distance away from us?::No. With few exceptions, the stars in a constellation have no connection with one another. They are actually at very different distances from the sun (see Activity Corner) Chance alignments of stars have created the patterns we see in the sky. 
Are the constellations permanent?::Ancient astronomers often spoke of the "fixed stars," which maintained permanent positions in the sky. And, indeed, the stars do seem almost fixed in place; the patterns they form look much the same today as they did when the constellations were first named nearly 3000 years ago. But the stars are all moving relative to the Sun, most with speeds of many kilometers per second. Because they are so very far away, it will take thousands of lifetimes to see significant changes in the star patterns. But, over time, they will change. Because of the motions of the stars within it, for example, the handle of the Big Dipper will, in about 50,000 years, appear significantly more bent than it is today (see figure at left). We will, no doubt, keep the same names for the constellations, even if the stars change their positions. Constellations are, after all, products of human imagination, not nature. 
How many planets are there in our solar system?::There are 8 planets in our solar system.
What is the smallest planet?::Mercury is the smallest planet.
What is the largest planet?::Jupiter is the largest planet.
Which planet is closest to the Sun?::Mercury is the closest planet to the Sun.
Which planet is farthest from the Sun?::Neptune is the farthest planet from the Sun.
What is the coldest planet?::On average Neptune is the coldest planet
What is the hottest planet?::Venus is the hottest planet.
What are the inner planets?::Mercury, Venus, Earth and Mars are the inner planets.
What are the outer planets?::Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus and Neptune are the outer planets.
Which planets have rings?::Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus and Neptune have rings.
Is there life on other planets?::Not that has been encountered so far!
Is Pluto a planet?::No, Pluto is a Dwarf Planet
Why is Pluto not a planet?::It does not meet the criteria set out by the IAU in 2006 to qualify as a planet.
How big is Pluto?::Pluto’s diameter is thought to be around 2,368 km.
When was Pluto discovered?::Pluto was discovered on the 18th of February 1930.
Who discovered Pluto?::Clyde W. Tombaugh discovered Pluto.
What is Pluto made of?::Pluto is roughly one third water ice and two thirds rocky material.
What colour is Pluto?::Pluto appears to be primarily brown.
How cold is Pluto?::The temperature on Pluto is between -233 to -223 degrees Celsius.
How many moons does Pluto have?::So far 5 moons have been discovered in orbit of Pluto; Charon, Nix, Hydra, Kerberos and Styx.
How many planets are there?::8
How many dwarf planets are there?::5
How many moons does Mercury have?::0
How many moons does Venus have?::0
How many moons does Earth have?::1
How many moons does Mars have?::2
How many moons does Jupiter have?::79
How many moons does Saturn have?::62
How many moons does Uranus have?::27
How many moons does Neptune have?::14
How many moons does Pluto have?::5
How Far Away From Earth, Is Space?::In fact, space is said to begin just 100km above the surface of the earth so if you were in a rocket then you would not need to travel for too long to hit space.When you look in the sky to the moon for instance you actually only need to travel a tiny, tiny fraction of the way to the moon to enter space.
How Does Gravity Affect Life On Pluto?::Well, there is much less gravity no Pluto than there is on the planet Earth. Therefore, it is easier to jump for instance a jump would take you much higher. Your body would also not need the robustness that it needs to deal with gravity here pushing down on your organs and so on, so might need to be less sturdy.
What is a black hole?::A black hole is a region of spacetime exhibiting gravitational acceleration so strong that nothing—no particles or even electromagnetic radiation such as light—can escape from it.
Which star is at the center of our Solar System?::Sun.
What is the diameter of Sun?::1,392,684 km (865,374 mi).
What percent of the solar system’s mass does Sun holds?::99.8 percent.
How many stars are in the Milky Way?::More than 100 billion.
When was Sun born?::Roughly 4.6 billion years ago.
What is the distance between sun and earth?::92,960,000 miles (149,600,000 km).
Sun’s Chemical Composition?::71% of Hydrogen, 26.5% Helium and2.5% of other elements.
How much time does sun rays take to reach earth?::8 minutes.
Which planet is nearest to the earth?::MERCURY.
Which planet is known as the Morning Star or the Evening Star?::VENUS.
What is the diameter of MERCURY?::3,032 miles (4,879 km).
What is the diameter of VENUS?::7,521 miles (12,104 km).
What is the diameter of EARTH?::7,918 miles (12,742 km).
What is the diameter of MARS?::4,212 miles (6,779 km)
What is the diameter of JUPITER?::86,881 miles (139,822 km).
What is the diameter of SATURN?::120 536 kilometers
What is the diameter of URANUS?::31,518 miles (50,724 km).
What is the diameter of NEPTUNE?::30,599 miles (49,244 km).
What is the diameter of PLUTO?::2360 kilometers.
Which is the largest planet in our solar system?::JUPITER.
Which Planet Has the Most Moons?::The planet with the most number of moons is Jupiter with 66 moons.
Which planet is closest to the sun?::name of the closest planet to the sun is : Mercury.
Which Is the Hottest Planet in the solar system?::Venus.
Which Planets Have Rings around Them?::Saturn,Jupiter, Uranus, and Neptune (4 planets).
Which is the coldest andsmallest of all planets?::PLUTO.
Which Star is called Earth’s satellite?::Moon.
What is the Average distance of Moon from Earth?::238,855 miles (384,400 km).
What is the age of Moon?::4.527 billion years.
What is the Orbital period of Moon?::27 days.
What is the Circumference of Moon?::6,784 miles (10,917 km).
Which planet has the most volcanoes?::Venus.
Which planets do not have moons?::Mercury and Venus.
How much larger the Sun is than Earth?::300000 times.
When the Halley’s Comet will be visible from Earth again?::2061.
What is the surface temperature of Venus?::Over 450 degrees Celsius.
When was the Solar System formed?::Around 4.6 billion years ago.
A person who weighs 200 pounds on earth, what would he weigh on the surface of Mars?::76 pounds.
Which Planet spins backwards relative to the others?::Venus.
When was the first man made object sent into space?::1957.
Name Jupiter’s 4 biggest moons:::Europa, Ganymede, Callisto and Io.
Why do we have high & low tides?::Because of the Sun & Moons gravity.
Where is The “edge of space” located?::100 km (62 mi) above sea level.
What is an astronaut employed by the Russian Federal Space Agency called?::Kosmonavt.
Who was the first person to reach space?::Yuri Gagarin, in 1961.
Who was the first woman to reach space?::Valentina Tereshkova, in 1963.
Name five recognized dwarf planets?::Pluto, Ceres, Eris, Makemake & Haumea.
The Moon orbits the Earth every::27.3 days.
Who was the first person to set foot on the Moon?::Neil Armstrong.
What is the average surface temperature of the Moon?::107 degrees Celsius during the day and -153 degrees Celsius at night.
When does a lunar eclipse occur?::When the Earth is between — the Sun and the Moon.
At how mush speed Moon moves across the Sun?::2,250 km per hour.
How long a solar eclipse can last?::7 and a half minutes.
What is the Equatorial Circumference of Earth?::40,030 km.
What is Earth’s surface temperature?::-88 to 58°C.
When was the Earth formed?::approximately 4.54 billion years ago.
How many natural satellites of Earth are there?::One, Moon.
What are the notable satellites of Mars?::Phobos & Deimos.
Which planet has approximately the same landmass as Earth?::Mars.
What are the notable satellites of Pluto?::Charon, Nix, Hydra, Kerberos and Styx.
When was the Pluto reclassified from a planet to a dwarf planet?::In 2006.
How many stars are there in Andromeda Galaxy?::1 trillion.
At which speed the Andromeda Galaxy is approaching the Milky Way?::At approximately hundred to hundred and forty kilometers per second.
How Big Is Venus?::In terms of size, Venus is the most like Earth, although not in terms of planetary conditions, climate, or hospitability for life. Venus is 95% the size of earth. In terms of the density of the planet, it is very close to earth. It is 30% closer to the Sun than the earth is. It is also incredibly hot around 880 degrees Fahrenheit at times, and sulphuric acid rain. The planet has a runaway greenhouse effect problem.
Do Galaxies Interact?::Of course we have no direct evidence of galaxies interacting but it does appear that they can and do, and are at this very moment, interacting.
Do Black Holes Really Exist?::As far as we can tell, they do exist, yes. Whilst no one has directly seen a black hole, they are of course dark objects so light cannot be seen; the effects of them can be seen.
Does the Universe have an edge, beyond which there is nothing?::Galaxies extend as far as we can detect... with no sign of diminishing.There is no evidence that the universe has an edge. The part of the universe we can observe from Earth is filled more or less uniformly with galaxies extending in every direction as far as we can see - more than 10 billion light-years, or about 6 billion trillion miles. We know that the galaxies must extend much further than we can see, but we do not know whether the universe is infinite or not. When astronomers sometimes refer (carelessly!) to galaxies "near the edge of the universe," they are referring only to the edge of the OBSERVABLE universe - i.e., the part we can see.
Are the galaxies arranged on the surface of a sphere?::No. Galaxies are not actually arranged on the surface of a sphere. Many students and teachers mistakenly believe that the galaxies in the universe are arranged on the surface of a sphere. One origin of this misconception is the common demonstration of blowing up a balloon to model the expansion of the universe. Another is the (mistaken) belief that during the Big Bang, matter expanded into space from a point (see below). A third is the finding that many clusters of galaxies appear to be arranged around the outside of "bubble-like" voids in the universe. But on the largest scales that astronomers have observed, each chunk of space appears to have just as much matter as any other equivalent chunk.
Why can't we see the whole universe?::We can see just about as far as nature allows us to see. Two things prevent us from seeing further. First, the universe has been evolving with time. Stars and galaxies did not always exist. Therefore light from MOST of the galaxies in the universe has not yet had time to reach us. Second, the universe has been expanding with time. Again, light from MOST of the universe has not yet had time to reach us. If you could suddenly freeze time everywhere in the universe, and magically survey all of creation, you would find galaxies extending out far beyond what we can see today. But how far, no one knows.
Does the term "universe" refer to space, or to the matter in it, or to both?::Just a hundred years ago, scientists thought of the universe in terms of matter. Space was just the "emptiness" in which matter lived. Today, the situation is reversed. During the twentieth century, scientists learned that space is not "nothingness." First, Einstein showed that space has structure: It is flexible and can be stretched. (In fact, when astronomers talk about the "expansion of the universe," they are referring to the stretching of space between clusters of galaxies - NOT to the motion of galaxies through space.) Later, scientists found other properties of space. For example, matter and anti-matter are routinely created in the laboratory from space itself (and an energy source); the kinds of particles that can exist reflect the structure of space. In fact, there is now evidence that space itself MAY possess some slight amount of energy of its own, of a form previously unknown. If so, space may actually have weight!
When they say "the universe is expanding," what exactly is expanding?::As bizarre as it may seem, space itself is expanding - specifically, the vast regions of space between galaxies.
But if you can't see space, or feel it or touch it - how can it be expanding?::According to Einstein, space is not simply emptiness; it's a real, stretchable, flexible thing. In fact, understanding the properties and behavior of space is a major goal of modern physics.
Why did anyone ever think that space should be expanding? Isn't it a far-fetched idea?::The notion that space is expanding is a prediction of Einstein's theory of gravity, which describes a simple but universal relationship between space, time, and matter. But it was a prediction that Einstein didn't believe; in fact, he tried to modify his theory to get rid of it.
Then how do we know that space really is expanding?::In the late 1920's, the astronomer Edwin Hubble first observed that distant galaxies are moving away from us, just as would be expected if the space between galaxies were growing in volume - and just as predicted by Einstein's theory of gravity. Since then, astronomers have measured this recession for millions of galaxies. But there's other evidence as well.
Are the galaxies in the universe moving through space?::No, the galaxies sit more or less passively in the space around them. As the space between galaxies expands, it carries the galaxies further apart - like raisins in an expanding dough.
Where did the Big Bang scenario come from?::If space (and everything with it) is expanding now, then the universe must have been much denser in the past. That is, all the matter and energy (such as light) that we observe in the universe would have been compressed into a much smaller space in the past. Einstein's theory of gravity enables us to run the "movie" of the universe backwards - i.e., to calculate the density that the universe must have had in the past. The result: any chunk of the universe we can observe - no matter how large - must have expanded from an infinitesimally small volume of space.
How do we know when the Big Bang took place?::By determining how fast the universe is expanding now, and then "running the movie of the universe" backwards in time, using Einstein's theory of gravity. The result is that space started expanding about 15 billion years ago, give or take a few billion years. This number is uncertain, in part because of uncertainties in our current measurements of how fast the universe is expanding, how much matter and energy there is, and even what kind of energy there is in the universe.
Do we know where, in space, the Big Bang took place?::It's a common misconception that the Big Bang was an "explosion" that took place somewhere in space. But the Big Bang was an expansion of space itself. Every part of space participated in it. For example, the part of space occupied by the Earth, the Sun, and our Milky Way galaxy was once, during the Big Bang, incredibly hot and dense. The same holds true of every other part of the universe we can see.
How do we know there really was a Big Bang?::Astronomers have detected, throughout the universe, two chemical elements that could only have been created during the Big Bang: hydrogen and helium. Furthermore, these elements are observed in just the proportions (roughly 75% hydrogen, 25% helium) predicted to have been produced during the Big Bang. This prediction is based on our well-established understanding of nuclear reactions - independent of Einstein's theory of gravity.
Was the Big Bang the origin of the universe?::It is a common misconception that the Big Bang was the origin of the universe. In reality, the Big Bang scenario is completely silent about how the universe came into existence in the first place. In fact, the closer we look to time "zero," the less certain we are about what actually happened, because our current description of physical laws do not yet apply to such extremes of nature.
Are there theories that go beyond the Big Bang?::Yes, there are theories that build on the Big Bang scenario by adding insights from physics about the structure of space itself. Watch this space for more details.
What is the big bang theory?::The Big Bang is the name that scientists use for the most common theory of the universe, from the very early stages to the present day. The universe began as a very hot, small, and dense superforce (the mix of the four fundamental forces), with no stars, atoms, form, or structure (called a "singularity").
What is a planet?::A celestial body moving in an elliptical orbit round a star.